# What are data structures? 

Data structures are classes that allow programmers to manipulate data and utilize computer memory in an efficient way. These data structures have methods and member variables like any other class. Each data structure is different and has different methods, efficiency, and use. 

To understand data structures and why they are important, think about data types like CHAR. You can create an instance of a CHAR to store a character in memory. But if you wanted to store a complete sentence, you would have to create an instance of a CHAR for every character in the sentence. Now, what would happen if you needed to delete or add more words to your sentence? You would end up with unused memory or not enough space from your initial CHARs vars.

To resolve this issue a new data type was created called String. A String is a data type that uses an array-based data structure to manage the allocation of Chars in memory. Without this data structure, it would be really hard to efficiently manage the characters of a sentence. 

There would be a section that will talk about array-based data structures, but in summary, they are classes that request the computer chunks of memory that are located next to each other. In the case of the String, a chunk of memory would be used by a Single Char. This data structure has methods that solve the problem of needing more memory for new words, searching for words or chars in the sentence, and even deleting words in the sentence. 

There are many scenarios where data and memory management is needed. There are also many data structures. You will learn in this course the fundamentals of these data structures so that you can decide what data structure to use to solve the problems that you encounter. 

[Next: Fundamentals Memory](./1.2-Memory.md)<br>
[Back: Fundamentals Index](./1-Index.md)<br>


